[Music]
This is the Hampton Inn. The red trimmed
sign. The familiar beige box.
Inside, a waffle station you man
yourself.
Crisp sheets, light switches right where
you'd expect, and that little sign that
promises 100% satisfaction.
Across the world, the aesthetic is
pretty similar.
So, how did one of America's most
predictable hotels become one of its
most profitable?
In the 1950s through the 1970s, there
were two types of hotels, full service
and motel. Full service offered on-site
dining options in addition to other
amenities, while roadside motel, the
more budget friendly choice, offered the
bare essentials, a room. But by the
1980s, the average American traveler was
in the market for something that better
fit their needs. There was a rise in
middle- class travel, and not everyone
wanted to spend the money to stay in a
luxury hotel downtown with a full
service restaurant and a big indoor
swimming pool. And they didn't like the
other option either, which was, you
know, the roadside motel. Some of which
had been cutting edge in the 50s or 60s
when they were first opened, but 20, 30
years later, they were a little tired.
And Hampton Inn was really created to to
be an alternative to that.
Mark Young is an archavist at the
University of Houston's Conrad N. Hilton
College of Global Hospitality
Leadership, home to the world's largest
hospitality archive. The college is
named after the Hilton Hotel's founder,
which owns the Hamptonin brand. It was a
grand dream, and the best part, it all
came true. The dream began in 1983 to
develop a new kind of hotel designed
from the ground up with the guest in
mind. Clean, simple, and smart. A good
night's sleep, and a free breakfast at
all one reasonable price. I mean, hey,
kind of says it all right there. You
know,
they figured out you could give guests
the cheaper stay that they wanted
without sacrificing quality by getting
rid of all of this stuff that they
didn't want.
In 1984, the first Hampton Inn opened in
Memphis, Tennessee.
They had 100% booking and they knew they
had a good product. They realized
they're going to have to sell this
product to hotel developers and
builders. So, how did they do it?
Hampton was the first to offer a free
complimentary breakfast as a standard.
They offered free coffee, a bagel, and a
muffin. Yes, it will cost the hotel
operator a little bit more money. The
American consuming public was more on
the go. And this breakfast fit that that
need. It took off. It proved widely
popular.
You got to love a place where you get a
lot of space for not a lot of money. And
the breakfast is free
at Hampton Inn. You got our guarantee.
A few years later, Hampton Inn became
the first hotel chain ever to offer a
100% satisfaction guarantee on your
night's stay.
Everyone criticized Hampton in for doing
this. Oh, you're going to lose tons of
money. But it's proved to be widely
successful.
It's invoked an average of about 1 to 1
and a half% of the time. Trudy Gandhi
Buckley is the senior vice president and
global brand head of Hampton by Hilton.
I've been in branding for a long time.
We always would look and study at who
are the brands that that do it
consistently time and time again and the
Hampton brand always came to the
forefront.
But there was of course competition.
Just 3 years after Hampton in opened,
Marriott introduced Fairfield in. And in
1990, Holiday Inn followed with Holiday
Inn Express. By the late 1990s, Hilton,
one of the largest hotel companies in
the US, recognized the market for
middle-class travel was growing and they
wanted in.
There was now what they call
segmentation within the hotel industry.
And so, you've got high-end properties,
mid-tier properties, economy properties,
and Hilton needed more of those mid-tier
properties. In 1999, Hilton bought
Hampton's parent company for about $4
billion. Hilton took the Hampton brand
and elevated it.
The buy Hilton endorsement allowed us to
gain even greater credibility with the
consumer marketplace in the United
States.
Since Hilton's acquisition in 1999,
Hampton has grown from around 1,000
hotels to over 3,000 worldwide. In
comparison, one of its key competitors,
Fairfield by Marriott, has around 1,300
hotels globally. Holiday and Express,
another major competitor, has slightly
more hotel properties than Hampton, but
fewer total rooms by about a thousand.
But the cost and responsibility of
maintaining these properties doesn't
actually fall on Hilton. It falls on the
franchise owners. In their current
portfolio of 8,497
hotels, only 47 are owned or leased by
Hilton. That's less than 1%. Hilton owns
virtually no hotels today. And it's this
assetike business model where the
franchises really fuel a growth.
I traveled extensively for work. Stayed
in hotels all the time, but never
thought about hotels as being an
attainable investment opportunity for
me. Early 2000s, I stayed at the
Aventura Hampton. When I checked into
the hotel, the front desk person said
there was free Wi-Fi and that there was
complimentary breakfast in the morning.
And I'm looking at her like, "Are you
serious?" Because at the time, the full
service hotels charged for those
services. When I got to my room, it was
beautiful, clean. I went to bed
thinking, "This is a great value." And I
literally woke up the next morning with
the epiphany that I should buy a hotel.
When you put together this great brand
that was a leader in the market and you
layer in the strength of Hilton, it just
becomes magical.
The cost of developing an 89 room
Hampton starts at $15 million, not
including the land, but the returns are
remarkable. Last year, the average
Hampton location outperformed
competitors by 21% in the US. Hampton
sold more than 90 million room nights
last year, according to Bloomberg
Analysis. That's a few million more than
its competitor, Holiday in Express.
People are more interested in the the
big luxury hotels, but you know, this is
really what the engine of of Hilton's
growth and profitability has been over
the time.
Hilton claims that Hampton's success is
due to their progressiveness. From
introducing white bedding,
and Hampton was actually the first brand
to go to all white beds with signified
cleanliness
to even alarm clock.
So easy. I mean, that's why I can see
why people liked it and it would still
be in there if it wasn't for everyone
has an iPhone now.
But it wasn't until the mid200s that
Hilton claims they became the first
midscale brand to offer free hot
breakfast items to guests. Hilton
executives at the time fanned out to the
big chicken farms of America and went
around, you know, looking for liqufied
eggs and they wound up with one that you
mixed with milk and scrambled in the
microwave. And that was the beginning of
free hot breakfast. Have you tried the
strawberry waffle at Hampton yet? I like
to make mine with an extra touch of
slipping.
And in 2010, Hampton was the first brand
to introduce make your own waffle
stations on a large scale.
This is an industrial waffle makers. I
mean, we're talking thousands and
thousands of waffles. Hampton serves
over 30 million large waffles in a year.
According to Hilton, that's equivalent
to 12 Empire State Buildings.
Today, free hot breakfasts aren't
revolutionary. Most of Hampton's top
competitors offer one. And when it comes
to waffles, Best Western and Windham's
Lintita now offer those, too. In fact,
Hampton and many of its competitors buy
waffle mix from the same supplier. And
when it comes to the price of a nightly
stay, Hampton's global nightly average
is around $125, which is pretty
comparable to the competition. So, what
is actually setting Hampton apart 40
years after its opening success?
Surprisingly, not much. Because they've
been so good at getting dots on the map,
they then have more resources to
advertise themselves or to invest in new
waffle flavors. This is like a
technocratic process of how do you make
this beige box as pleasing to your
guests as possible? And then you have to
keep doing it and keep making it better
because every year the hotel gets a
little bit older and you need to give
guests another reason to come stay.
The secret of Hampton success is
simplicity and consistency. You know
what you're getting.
It is an irony of the travel industry is
that we travel to go places that are
new, but the thing that we want when
we're in those places is something
that's comfortable and familiar and the
same everywhere.
First of all, you don't have 20 million
light switches and they are very
intentional.
Barack Obama once said that Hampton in
is his favorite hotel brand because he
knows where the light switches are.
That's pretty easy. Okay. So, what's
next for the brand of simplicity and
cleanliness?
Hampton does continue to open hotels in
the United States, but its biggest
opportunities for growth are abroad.
More than half of Hampton locations
under development are outside the US
with China now the brand's second
biggest market and India slated to
develop 75 Hamptons in the coming years.
I asked Hilton CEO Chris Netta how many
Hampton Inns he thinks he'll have in 20
years and he said 9,000. Um, which is a
huge number, right? The brand was about
1,500 when Netta took over Hilton in
2007. 18 years later it's doubled. Now
he wants to triple it in the same amount
of time. That only works if they can
stick the landing on the cultural
translations. You have to grow or die.
The roadsides of America are littered
with hotel brands that have fallen off.
This is a really important part of a big
company that needs to stave off
obsolescence however it can. It still
comes back to the waffle for me. Um, and
you know, now the waffle is hot magenta.
[Music]